[Music]
well we finally know what killed the
Aztecs around 500 years ago the once
flourishing Aztec empire suddenly
collapsed a total of about 15 million
people from brave warriors to successful
farmers and tradesmen and everyone in
between mysteriously died one by one who
or what killed them
was it the Spaniards or perhaps some
terrible epidemic scientists believed
that the latter of the two might have
been the culprit and it looks like
they've finally found exactly what
brought on this civilization destroying
disease watch this video to find out how
it came about and to learn some
interesting facts about the Aztecs that
you might not have known plus we've got
a little game for you keep an eye out
for the four little light bulbs hidden
throughout this video why light bulbs
because it's our symbol here at bright
side of course as soon as you found them
all let us know in the comments the
first attentive viewer will be featured
in one of our next videos good luck now
back to the Aztecs in the middle of the
16th century these people started dying
in large numbers due to what is known as
the cocoa leastly epidemic which hit in
two waves the first one was in 1545 and
the second in 1576 as with all diseases
this one had incredibly unpleasant
symptoms the scariest of which included
uncontrollable vomiting profuse bleeding
from the eyes nose and mouth and swollen
painful masses around the ears and neck
sorry for those of you who have just sat
down to a meal in the end as you can
imagine this disease had a very small
survival rate scientists have always had
several theories as to what caused this
mass dying it might have been the plague
typhoid fever measles the flu or a whole
slew of other infections well it looks
like they finally found the answer in
their most recent research
results of which were published in the
nature ecology and evolution journal
molecular paleo pathologist
Kirsten Bose and her team analyzed DNA
extracted from the teeth of Aztec
remains buried in what is now southern
Mexico they worked with 29 human
skeletons using the latest scientific
research methods and they found traces
of the Salmonella enterica bacteria now
we've all heard of salmonella the
bacteria known for causing food
poisoning nowadays it takes most people
four to seven days to recover from it on
their own but in Aztec times things were
quite different as we know this
bacterium enters our bodies from
contaminated food and water and mostly
affects the gut but finding it in their
teeth means that it was spreading
throughout their bodies and into their
bloodstream who would have thought
that's something we don't really give a
second thought to today could be
powerful enough to take down an entire
empire now how did that Salmonella even
get there one major version is that it
was one of the gifts the Europeans
brought to the new world so when we
suggested it was the Spaniards who
killed the Aztecs we weren't far off
really the diseases they and other
Europeans carried across the ocean gave
rise to some of the most devastating
epidemics ever the Coco leastly one
we're talking about spread all over
central Mexico and Guatemala and even
reached Peru however some scientists
believe the bacterium was born in the
land of the Aztecs and the Europeans
themselves didn't know how to cure it so
they got infected too how about we give
the scientists more time to decide who's
to blame for the spread of salmonella
enterica and if it was the only cause of
the Empire's destruction for now we'll
occupy ourselves with some interesting
facts about the people who gave the
world chocolate no we're not talking
about Hershey we're talking about the
first people to discover this wonderful
delight the Aztecs
we're definitely grateful to them for
satisfying our sweet tooth hit the
thumbs up if you are too counting down
from number 10
the name we know them as the Aztecs but
this isn't exactly their original name
it was coined by the arriving Europeans
and probably inspired by a place called
aztlán in northern Mexico
the Aztecs called themselves Mexico and
that name later became the name of the
country Mexico number nine the original
basketballers the Aztecs kind of pre
invented basketball or at least a ball
game that looks a lot like the
basketball we know today their game was
called bear with me here my Aztec is a
little rusty uh llama is Lea
they used a rubber ball which was pretty
revolutionary for that period of time
and played on a special ground called a
fletchling
players were supposed to throw the ball
through a small stone ring okay sounds
like basketball or Quidditch and we're
only allowed to touch it with their head
elbows knees and hips okay
definitely not basketball also an
important rule was that the ball
couldn't hit the ground so basically it
was basketball on steroids
gotcha number eight interesting calendar
the Aztecs used a solar calendar with
365 days in a year okay doesn't sound
like a very interesting calendar does it
but wait there's more this calendar was
broken into eighteen months lasting
twenty days each if you crunch the
numbers 20 times 18 gives us 360 so what
happened to the rest of the year those
extra five days at the end of the year
were something like five Friday the 13th
in a row in other words they believe
those days were super unlucky can you
imagine trying to get through five
unlucky days in a row I just locked
myself in my house and binge watch my
shows number seven unique slavery system
the Aztecs
not only had a special calendar but also
a unique system of slavery poor people
could sell their kids or even themselves
into slavery the money they got in that
deal plus their potential earnings for
their hard work gave them a chance to
buy
their freedom or they could try to run
away walk into a holy temple and
automatically lose their property status
sounds to me like the adult version of
can't touch me I'm safe but even staying
a slave didn't equal a life full of
endless suffering slaves could get
married have families and property and
wait for it by their own slaves whoa
it's kind of like slave ception plus to
top it all off kids born into slaves
automatically become property of the
slave owner if there were any way to
make the atrocious practice of slavery
moral in any kind of way it sounds like
the Aztecs might have achieved that
number six polygamy
speaking of family polygamy as long as
it abided by some strict rules was
allowed to Aztec men they could have
only one marriage ceremony with the
first primary wife however the other
wives were also mentioned in the
official records and were supposed to be
treated with just as much respect as the
main wife a family with more than one
wife was wealthy and usually belong to
high society divorces weren't allowed
but the punishment for adultery was
death Wow the Aztecs didn't mess around
when it came to cheating now how many
light bulbs have you seen so far
remember they may be hidden anywhere now
let's get back to the video number five
keeping records Nahuatl was the official
language of the Aztecs and based on my
terrible pronunciation of all these
words I should seriously consider taking
up a course in it
no this language consisted of an
alphabet made up of pictures kind of
like hieroglyphs the writing materials
were bark or deerskin and they used
charcoal as a pet the Aztecs left behind
detailed records on their religious
sacrifices important events and even
taxes number four Arts and Crafts
the Aztecs may have killed a lot of
people but that doesn't mean they were
just a bunch of stupid barbarians they
made amazing art granted it was mostly a
way of paying tribute to the gods
but talent is talent they enjoy pottery
as well and carved sculptures and huge
idols out of stone to place inside
temples their working materials included
Jade obsidian in quartz all of which
serve to create pretty realistic looking
figures of people and animals warrior
art was a special art form to the Aztecs
decorated their brave soldiers with
certain tattoos that displayed their
accomplishments on the battlefield and
finally the Aztecs even wrote poetry
number three compulsory schooling more
proof that the Aztecs cared about the
arts and education is shown in their
compulsory public schooling system kids
from richer noble families studied
history astronomy art government and
leadership kids from the lower caste
went to a different school to learn all
the skills a future warrior would need
girls studied in separate schools and
their lessons were mostly about cooking
weaving and other domestic skills number
two their capital the Aztecs main city
was located in the middle of a lake
called 1002 ticklin and home to a
whopping two hundred thousand residents
it was larger than most cities in Europe
at the time they even had garbage
collectors to keep the city super clean
the lake were used to stand is mostly
dry land today and Mexico City is
located there now and number one
chocolate finally the moment we've all
been waiting for
what do the Aztecs have to do with
chocolate they graciously shared it with
the rest of the world and they did it in
a pretty funny way they missed tough
Herman Cortes a Spanish conquistador for
a local God who at once left but
promised to come back Cortes appeared in
the exact same spot that God had been
expected to return Montezuma the Aztec
leader presented Cortez with a cup of
cocoa and a whole plantation of it this
is how the Spanish people learn the
secret of chocolate Oh see even the word
chocolate as we know and love it today
was derived from the Aztec language
now I want a piping cup of hot chocolate
oh we hope you enjoyed this video and
learned a thing or two about history hit
the thumbs up if you learned something
cool today did you manage to find all
five bulbs we mentioned in the beginning
please share in the comments below don't
forget to subscribe to our channel to be
the first to see our updates and
remember life is better on the bright
side brights